I brought everything that I could find
in the supermarket that was making a
claim that it was good for me. And I
want you to take a look at it. That Tim
Spectre is definitely healthy or not.
Avoid that one. Terrible. Complete
rubbish. Not as bad as the other one,
but we're going to unravel all these
secrets. The return of the world's
biggest
gut health expert, Professor Tim
Spectre.
He's an award-winning scientist,
bestselling author,
and he's co-founder of the company Zoey,
the home kit for personalized nutrition.
Everything I'm about to throw at you has
a whole industry of people behind it.
The first one is protein supplements.
Protein is massively hyped. Most people
are having nearly twice as much protein
in their diets as they need and most of
it will be converted to sugars and fat.
Coffee. It's definitely a health food
and you'll live longer.
Mouthwash. You're more prone to
infections and actually worse smelling
breath long term.
Really?
Yes. No hard data that you should be
drinking eight glasses of water a day.
10 minutes in the sun will get you all
the vitamin D you need. And there's some
actual data showing that if you got too
much excess fat on your body, exercise
alone is a terrible way to deal with it.
You need something radical. You and many
others like you are a victim of
marketing. But we are in a fiber crisis.
We think only about one in 20 people are
getting enough fiber for good health.
Has a dramatic effect on avoiding
cancers, mental health, and your
longevity. So you brought this. Yep.
That's the magic potion. A handful of
that. You reduce your risk of death by
14 15%. Two handfuls at 30%. And it's
incredibly easy to do. So
[Music]
Tim, what is the um benefit to me if I
change the way that I'm eating and start
thinking through the lens of my gut
microbiome and start taking the advice
that you talk about in your books? What
is the benefit to both me and society in
terms of statistical like outcomes? Like
why does it matter?
It matters because we are suffering an
epidemic of common chronic diseases. So
we're getting increases in cancer, heart
disease, diabetes, obesity.
We you know uh majority of the
population are overweight or obese. That
has enormous consequences also on our
economic output. Um it costs the country
and the taxpayer nearly 60 billion
pounds a year. As a country, we don't
want someone like you to become
unhealthy and so that it's difficult for
you to work. You're not functioning
properly. The state then has to provide
for you extra health care etc. There's
that individual level, but also we don't
want you to get mental health diseases,
depression,
u anxiety, all these things that we know
are also linked to poor diet as well as
increased cancers and and other elements
of it. So, it's it's a combination of
the medical uh the mental, the social,
the economic, all these things are
related to having good nutrition. And I
think we've taken it for granted that it
doesn't really matter what we eat. It's
all about weight and these things. But
that's maybe only the small side of it.
I think there's much more to it than
that.
Someone like me, I'm, you know, 30-ish
years old and I'm I like to think that
I'm in good shape. I exercise every day.
Um, very active. So sometimes I think I
can fall into the trap of thinking
because there's no obvious sign of
disease in me that I can eat what I want
because I'm working out. And then I I
sat here with a doctor a couple of
couple of months ago and he said a
sentence to me that sounded something
like we can see disease growing in you
decades out. That really made me change
my thinking on health. Because if it is
like a seed of health or a seed of
disease that's growing in me
irrespective of my current physical
abilities in my, you know, think I'm in
good shape,
it's kind of like compounding invisibly
inside of me disease for better or for
worse. And that means that even someone
like me, I can I can stop 50-year-old
Steve's disease now at 30 by making
nudging my health in a slightly
different direction in terms of
nutrition. Is that an accurate
assessment of because there'll be people
that are listening that are so healthy,
apparently healthy on the outside
because they can run fast or because
they haven't got any problems with their
bones or back.
Yeah. Well, when I was your age, I
didn't think at all about my nutrition
really. Um, you know, although I was
trained doctor, etc. I said, I don't
want too much fat. I want this and, you
know, I'll try and get a nice looking
steak rather than the cheapest one. Um
but I I I didn't think in that way that
I wanted to look after my health in 20
years time. It's a tough concept for
people who are you know doing so much
else and still feeling good that you
know still getting out of bed fresh in
the morning energized and not really
feeling the effects of of aging. So I
think it's true but it's it's quite a
tough concept to sell to the whole
population particularly people in their
20s and 30s about the future
and that's why I think uh focusing on
things like mental health do resonate
perhaps more than saying um think about
what you're going to be like when you're
50 to most people. I've spent definitely
the last 10 years of my life believing
that in order to grow big muscles, which
has been an aim of throughout my life, I
need to have protein supplements.
What do you think about that? I still
have protein supplements in my house.
Protein powders, come home from the gym,
big scoop of protein, drink it. What do
you think of that?
Protein is massively hyped.
There are very few people who are
protein deficient in this country and
need supplements. There are a few, but I
would say it's less than 5% of the
population are not getting sufficient
protein to perform either their normal
activities or like you build muscle
because it's so inherent in our normal
food. We we evolved, you know, to be
omnivores and to get enough protein and
our ancestors didn't fall apart because
we didn't get protein shakes. And I
think the the fact that we're focusing
on protein is you're you and many others
like you are a victim of marketing that
everywhere you look at the moment
protein is the thing that sells
products. If it's got protein on the
pack, it's you know that's ringing. Oh,
I need extra protein. And protein has
this uh ring of only good about it.
There's nothing bad about protein. It's
like just going to get me big and
strong. And I don't worry about calories
or getting fat. You know, I use it or
lose it and that's fine. And it's
completely wrong.
All the evidence is that um most people
are having nearly twice as much protein
in their in their diets as they need for
normal uh protein balance. And the only
people that really need to worry are if
you're um elderly and you're not eating
very much. Okay? So young people
generally like yourself will be getting
enough food that a percentage of all
that food is going to contain protein.
There's very few foods that don't
contain protein. Uh people don't think
about it, but every time you're eating
pasta or grains, you're eating protein.
Um it doesn't have to be steak or eggs.
And but the elderly, if you're not
eating, you're gone off your food,
you're sick, you've got, you know,
you're on some medication,
uh might need some extra protein sources
or to focus on it. or if you're a strict
vegetarian or vegan in that position
where you're not eating much or you're
sick or you're elderly, then those
people do need something. Now, if you
are a bodybuilder
and again, you're you're trying to lose
weight at the same time,
then you might need some protein
supplements. But if you're eating a
normal diet, there's no evidence that
the vast majority of of people need any
extra protein. They can get it all from
normal food. And normal food, in my
opinion, is a much better way of getting
it because that's how our bodies have
evolved rather than getting it in a
drink or a supplement or a powder where
it's often mixed with other chemicals.
It's not in its natural form. We're not
sure that it's all used and the excess
protein you have isn't for free.
protein gets broken down and it either
gets eliminated in your body or it's
stored as fat um as it gets converted to
uh sugars and then to fats. So people
think of protein as only in muscle and
if it's not going to my muscle I just
pee it out. It doesn't matter. Not the
case. If you're having lots of protein
that you you can't use up in your
muscles because you already got so much
on board, you can't store it anywhere.
it uh some of it gets eliminated but
most of it will be converted to sugars
and fat.
This goes against everything they told
me
because I thought that you could have as
much protein as you like. Your body
can't store it. So I must just be like
pooping it out or something. I don't
know. Um
can't store it as protein.
Okay.
But it gets converted. It's broken down
into small pieces and that gets stored
in your body uh for the future. So, how
much protein can I process in like a
day? How how many grams of protein?
How many kilos roughly you about?
Oh, 90. Say 911 because there's people
listening.
It's all muscle though.
Um, so around roughly that amount of
protein. Um,
uh, because it goes with weight. The the
more your weight is, the more protein
you need to to repair your muscles and
and keep it going. So uh the official
amount is normally around you know 0.8
uh gram per kilogram. Okay.
Okay.
So but if we think you know we want to
be on the safe side. So most people are
95% of people that's the uh a safe level
but most people uh in this country are
having like 1.4
um grams per kilogram. So they'd be
having uh for you over a 100 grams of
protein and
basically if you don't anything extra so
you might do a little workout that might
increase it a little bit maybe 10%. So
you might be able to use uh 10% of that
if you're doing a lot of weightlifting
etc.
Um but not huge amounts. So, if you took
uh grams of protein, most of it is just
going to be either you you'd be getting
rid of it, excreting it in some way, or
it would be uh converted into uh sugars
and fats.
Stat I found here, the average daily
intake of protein in the UK is 76 gram
per day for adults aged 19 to 64
and 67 grams a day for adults aged 65
years and over. So that's how much on
average people are consuming with their
normal diets.
Yeah. So it's just roughly depending on
the size of people, it's just over a a
gram per kilo. And they're getting that
without protein. Most of them without
protein powders just from their normal
diets. I mean, as an example, my, you
know, my normal breakfast gives me, I
worked out, you know, over 30 grams of
protein,
um, which is sort of what you want to
kickstart the day, uh, in order to get
muscles repairing things. But if I took,
you know, an extra protein powder to
give me an extra 100 gram, that really
wouldn't have any effect at all other
than slightly increasing my weight.
What about fiber? I've got two questions
here. What is fiber in the most simple
terms? And
is it why is it important? And are we
consuming enough fiber in our natural
diets in the UK?
So unlike protein where 95% of people
are absolutely fine and not deficient in
protein
95% of people are deficient in fiber. We
think only about one in 20 people are
getting enough fiber for for good
health. So this is this is the imbalance
between the marketing. People just don't
make money on fiber like they do on
protein. So all the commerce is going to
everyone's protein deficient. You got to
have protein, protein, protein, protein.
You know who's supporting the spinach or
the you the um the fiber people? Hardly
anybody. We're massively deficient in
it. It is the bits of carbohydrates. So
carbohydrates are made up of sugars,
starches, and fibers. So fibers are the
parts of carbohydrates that are not
broken down and absorbed early on in the
system. So they go through to the deeper
parts of the intestine. They meet the
microbes and they have to be digested
much slower, much lower down your
system. And they're food for your gut
microbes. And it could be soluble ones.
They could be insoluble ones. They're
just different degrees of how hard it is
to break it down. And we used to think
of it as ruffage. It used to be called
roughage when I was a a medical student
and a junior doctor. You used to eat
this stuff and it was just to like clear
out the toxins. It was just like you
have this stuff, it scrapes your pipes
and cleans it up and that's all it was
thought to do. But now we we know it's
absolutely crucial for health. The
average in the UK is about 20 grams of
fiber. So if you just increase that by a
quarter,
not very much, five grams, that's uh uh
you know a handful of nuts or seeds or
something a day. you will increase uh or
you reduce your risk of death by 14 15%.
And if you did two handfuls of nuts 30%.
It each one it goes up. So has a
dramatic effect on your uh longevity and
it's also important for avoiding cancers
and mental health and nearly everything
that we've looked at. So, it's really
the forgotten element of our of our diet
that I think at the moment we're, you
know, in a fiber crisis. We're certainly
not in a protein crisis and yet
everyone's talking about protein. It's
really it's really a fascinating
interplay between, you know, what the
real problems are and what the marketing
and and the commerce of this whole field
is. So, we need to improve everybody's
fiber amounts. All the healthy countries
in the world are eating much more fiber
and it's also diverse fiber. It's lots
of different things. It's not just
having kale. When you came on the
podcast last time, you said something
which I found to be quite daunting,
which was this idea of trying to get 30
plants into my diet a week. You've
brought some food with you today for me
that you say can help me with this.
Jack, could you grab the food that Tim
brought with him today? So, you brought
this jar of what looks like a bunch of
nuts and seeds.
Yep. That's the magic potion.
Magic potion. Tell me more.
So, this is what I call my diversity
jar. So, um, do have a nibble, but
basically there's about 10 different
types of nut and seed in there that each
time I see some packet of mixed nuts or
I find something new in a in a shop, I
add it to that jar and I keep it full,
mix it around, and that's what I throw
on my yogurt and keir in the morning or
I will put on my salad at lunch And that
basically is a a hack that instantly
gets me 10 plants for my week. So you're
saying how hard it is to get to 30
plants. Well, just by doing that, you've
got uh you've only got 20 to go. I say
you're a third of the way just by having
a few hacks like that, which
incidentally also gives you your
protein. Okay. So rather than your
protein shakes and your whatever handful
of that um you've got you know
significant amounts of of protein but
the important thing for this is the 30
plants people forget that a plant
doesn't have to be doesn't look like
spinach or kale. It can be a nut and a
seed which are so nutrientdense and so
useful that they will keep whole
colonies of hundreds or thou thousands
of different microbes happy in your gut
munching on the different chemicals in
there and they're very high in fiber
very high in protein. I
was going to say about the fiber thing.
This is a this is a way to get the fiber
as well.
Absolutely. Yes. So they're high high
fiber and high protein and that's why
they are are so nutritious and why if
you're having this sort of stuff you
really don't need uh chemical
supplements. And so that that's a that's
just one of several hacks about how you
can add these to your foods very easily
as well as you know mentally just
thinking I want to try and find
add different things to my my meal. I
don't want to have the same meal every
single day. People get stuck going to,
you know, their local sandwich shop and
saying, "I'm only having that prawn
salad, prawn salad, prawn salad." You
know, just think every day, go something
different. And if people start thinking
differently about food, not only does it
excite the taste buds a bit more and
gets you out of your rut, but it's also
going to generate many more microbes.
So, you know, if you're going to beat
me,
you need to be getting more diversity in
there to to grow more species so that
you can uh, you know, keep them all
happy. And they they live, you know,
they live off diversity and variety just
as we humans do.
So, when I got my Zoey results back, I
one of the the PDF shows all the bugs in
my stomach. Is that what you call them,
bugs? We have a more technical
bugs or mic microbes.
Let's call them microbes then. uh just
because it makes me sound smarter. So
all the microbes in my in my belly and I
had a very narrow group of microbes. Now
if I you're telling me that if I expand
that collection of microbes, my overall
health will be better. I'll process my
food better. My mental health will be
better. Is there anything I'm I'm
missing from that list?
Your immune health would be better. So
okay,
immunity would be better. So you'd get
less food allergies. You'd get um uh
resistance to infection would be better.
So, how do I bring I know this sounds
like super stupid question to ask, but I
looked at that list and thought, okay,
so I almost thought of it like little
pets living inside me.
Um, the where do these where do I get
the new pets from? Like the new animals
from to put inside my body cuz I I was
thinking my girlfriend's got loads of
them. I'll just kiss her.
Yes. Well, well, you could kiss your
girlfriend. And there is quite a lot of
swapping between partners, by the way,
in microbes. So, you're not wrong there.
Mhm. But unless they had something to
eat, they'd die off. Okay. So, what
you're doing is um you know, we are
continually surrounded by many of these
microbes, we are swapping uh microbes
with all our close friends and family
all the time. But, uh unless you've got
the fertilizer in you, they're not going
to survive.
And the fertilizer is diversity of
foods.
Yes. And you may have and you know
you've kissed your girlfriend, you've
got some of her microbes and they're
just sitting there waiting for to be
fed, right? They might be in a very
dormant state. Many of these microbes
can go into spore formation and stay
there for years doing nothing in tiny
amounts. They only wake up when, you
know, a peanut hits them on the head or
something and says, "Oh, you know,
Steven's given me some food at last. You
know, this I can eat this. I couldn't
eat the other. I can't eat Nando. I'm
going for this." So that's the concept
that you want to give them this rich
soil so that they can flourish and you
can gain microbes from going to other
countries you know eating a variety of
foods and there are microbes that live
on a lot of fresh produce uh that you
can get you get them from dogs uh
animals um just by having a pet around
the house or going to the countryside
you can get more microbes in you but
it's It's a lot of them are actually
inside us waiting and places like our
appendix may may be sources of tiny
amounts of these microbes that are just
waiting, you know, for the right signal
to wake up. I think this is fascinating.
I looked at the back end of our YouTube
channel and it says that since this
channel started, 69.9%
of you that watch it frequently haven't
yet hit the subscribe button. So, I have
a favor to ask you. If you've ever
watched this channel and enjoyed the
content, if you're enjoying this episode
right now, please could I ask a small
favor? Please hit the subscribe button.
Helps this channel more than I can
explain. And I promise if you do that to
return the favor, we will make this show
better and better and better and better
and better. That's the promise I'm
willing to make you if you hit the
subscribe button. Do we have a deal? I,
after our last conversation, was always
going through the supermarket trying to
figure out what's fermented and what's
not. How do I know what's fermented?
What does fermented even mean? Um, and
you brought this array of things with
you to show me how easy it is to ferment
things in your own home, I guess.
Yeah. I think people are frightened by
fermentation,
and it's important to know what it is
and what it isn't. So fermentation is a
word lots of different meanings but it's
when food is modified by microbes to
produce something that is tastes
different, tastes better and is also
healthy for you. And in a way it's a
probiotic food because what we're doing
is we're taking basic whole foods and we
are adding something like salt or sugar
and that then allows natural
uh microbes on those plants to flourish
and change the composition of that for
that food. So they make it acidic, they
get rid of all the bad bugs, and they
make it into something super healthy,
and all the microbes are growing just
like they would be in your gut if you
fed them. So it's like a a mini version
of your gut is what we're seeing here.
Um, and it's incredibly easy to do. So
that's why I brought this stuff along so
that we I can demonstrate not only how
to get extra plants into your 30 a week,
but also if those plants are fermented,
they have many more times more nutrients
in them. And the fact that those bugs
have been working on them, it means
they've been in a way predigested before
they get into your gut. And all these
studies are showing these are super good
for all aspects of your health. And if
you can have uh several portions these a
day, you'll really notice the
difference.
So for people that are just listening on
audio and can't see what have we got in
front of you here. So, we've got uh a
jar like a like a one liter jar of which
is full of uh chopped veg from uh the
bottom of my fridge. All of us would
have fridges like this where you got
odds and ends left behind. And the idea
is that you rather than throwing it
away, you can actually just chop it up
and ferment it and
stick it in a jar. And there is I can
see cabbage. I can see a radish in
there. It's just like the the waste veg
that most people would probably chuck in
the bin.
Exactly. So, a few years ago, I'd have
just thrown this in the bin. I wouldn't
have thought about doing it. So, you you
throw it out. People have heard about
sauerkraut, which is basically just um
fermented cabbage.
And you might have heard of kimchi,
which is the Korean version, which has
just got a few more things in it, like
chilies and ginger and spices.
uh and this is a sort of mixture of all
of them. But it's just to illustrate the
fact that you can ferment virtually all
plants and avoid the waste. And that's
what our ancestors did before fridges
because all you need to do is uh put
them in a jar and squash them down and
add 2% salt and a little bit of water to
cover it. And that's all you do. And I
can I can just demonstrate that now for
you if you like.
So we've got all these in here. And the
idea is you um add some add the salt.
So, we're adding 2% salt. This is really
important to measure it. So, this that's
the only thing really tricky is to make
sure that you've got uh 2% salt and that
gets poured in there. And you you would
mix it around. Uh I would normally put
it in a big bowl and do it, but uh you
you get the idea here. You you you put
the salt in, you mix it around, and you
scrunch it down really hard. So, you
know, like um really getting rid of any
space for air cuz the microbes don't
like air.
The ones that ferment they call
anorobic. They don't like oxygen and so
they grow really well when you cut out
the oxygen and they can just um live off
start eating the sugars in in the in
these plants and the salt gives them a
competitive advantage against nasty
microbes.
Okay. So that means that they can out
compete the other guys cuz it's suddenly
a different environment and that's what
we're doing. So you squash it down and
um I'm going to add a little bit of
water here. Sometimes you don't need to
add hardly any water and if you add more
than a bit just add a little bit of salt
to that water, just enough to cover it
because the microbes are naturally in
all these plants. People don't realize
that. They think, "Oh, it must be
sterile. I've got it from a nice
supermarket in a plastic wrapper." Um
it's full of microbes and that's normal.
And we know that even in garlic for
example, even when you cut it, there are
perhaps uh 10 20 different types of
micro living in that garlic. And once
they they sense the water and the salt,
they will suddenly say, "Oh, it's good
to come out. I can out compete. I can
grow and I can start munching the the
sugar." And then to pack it down, you
either use you can use some stones, some
clean stones. What I like to do is use
some leftover waste. Um, so I get some
outside cabbage leaves or something else
from a plant and just put it down in
there, squash it. And so you can see
that it's now below the water line.
Mhm.
And I close the lid
and that's basically it. And I would
leave that for a minimum of 3 days
somewhere room temperature out of the
sun. And you'll start to see bubbles
forming. And that's CO2. The microbes
are producing that. They're fermenting
it. That's it. And you've got suddenly
your own probiotic fermented food made
from your scraps rather than throwing it
out. And that's that's a great example
of what you can do um to really improve
your health for something that costs
nothing uh apart from the price of salt.
And that's one you made earlier.
Yeah, this is a nicer looking one that's
uh one I I did earlier. And I'm just
going to see. You can see a few bubbles
there. Uh it's it's just starting to to
get going. Um and uh you can open it up
uh every day or so to give it a smell
and see what's happening. Making sure
that it's packed down so that it's all
below the water line. Once you've done
this, once it's fermented after a week,
uh you can put in the fridge for months.
Oh, really? So you could put that in the
fridge fridge for months.
Yeah. Once it's fermented, the it's
become acidic
and the pH has dropped below 4.5. No
other microbes can live there. Only the
ones you want, you've selected
personally. These are your probiotic
microbes that we know are good for your
health. And the difference between this
and your probiotic capsule is that
you'll probably get 30 different
microbes here, whereas you take your
capsule, you might get two or three.
So this is why fermented foods I think
are a real answer to many of our
problems. You know, the fact that we've
got a rather western deprived
microbiome, these could really help um
people like you want to boost your gut
microbiome and just introducing these
fermented foods into your regular diet.
And this is what the Koreans do. For
example, you know, the Japanese do by
using fermented soybeans in nearly all
their foods. So many of the healthiest
populations have large amounts of
fermented food in their diets.
When you look at the Japanese and the
Koreans, do they have better gut
microbiomes than the people in the UK
and the US?
Yes, they do. And they but importantly,
they live much longer and have you much
less of our uh chronic diseases or they
delay those problems by at least 10
years. So I think we need to learn from
the the populations that are doing it
right and this is a really easy
uh thing to do and I think it's it's a
great exercise in in teaching because if
you think what's going on it's this is
mirroring what's going on inside your
gut. If you had that rich diversity of
of plants in there you can get many
microbes to um to to proliferate. And
once you start seeing the bubbles
forming and the the the amazing change
in taste and texture that you're
getting, you got to remember this is the
difference between a grape and an
amazing uh vintage red wine. It's just
the effect of those microbes in the
effect, you know, on on that grape skin
just changing over time, increasing that
complexity and producing chemicals. It
all it's basically a sort of chemistry
lesson. When I'm in the supermarket,
there are lots of things that now have
labels on them saying that they're great
for gut health or they're low sugar or
they're low fat. I brought everything
that I could find in the supermarket
that was making a claim that it was good
for me. And I want you to take a look
look at it. These are some of the most
popular things that people pick up in
the supermarket that make these claims
that they're low sugar, low fat, low
high protein, great for gut health. So,
the first one I've got here is Actimal,
which had says it's got vitamin D, B6.
It's great for immune support, zero
added sugar, 0% fat,
rich in vitamin D. That Tim Spectre is
definitely healthy
or not.
So, um, yeah, these these claims, uh,
some of these claims they're allowed to
put on the packet. There is very
restricted what they can actually say in
terms of health it can do are date back,
you know, 30 years and no longer really
valid, but they they have to do it
because they're not allowed to even
mention the word probiotic on a on a
packet, interestingly. So, they're
trying to attract you in with things
that would resonate with the consumer.
So they do these massive surveys to
saying what's going to resonate with you
Steve when you go into oh and you say oh
what's going to what's going to make me
buy this rather than one of the other
ones and so vitamin D we've been
flogging vitamin D for forever you know
10 minutes in the sun will get you all
the vitamin D you need um and it's in
most foods anyway you don't really need
it in addition in these things uh 0%
added sugar and 0% added fat mean that
it's highly processed. So, the
combination of health, what we call
health halos,
um saying it's super healthy
with uh rich in this vitamin, le no
sugar, no fat, um is very old-fashioned
science. No one believes that that zero
fat is any good for you anymore. And
there's some actual data showing that
low-fat foods actually uh make you
overeat.
Really?
Yes. What does the data say?
So when they've compi compared sort of
identical uh meals to people in lab
conditions, those eating the lowfat
foods, the um high carb but high
processed foods like this will actually
overeat substantially over the next uh
day or so. So it's actually making you
overeat uh quite significantly. So, and
there's no advantage to your body in
terms of heart health by having this
because to get zero fat and make it
taste good, it's got to have lots of
extra sugars and starches in there.
Otherwise, you you you just couldn't eat
it. Fat is really important naturally to
make you enjoy food.
And so, it takes a lot of careful
chemistry to mimic that fat. So, I would
always avoid anything that said, you
know, zero sugar, zero fat, uh, rich in
vitamins, despite the fact that this
probably has something good probiotics
in it.
So, you get in a good probiotics, um,
it's only one lactobacillus, but that's
counteracted by all this negative stuff,
all these chemicals which we know are
bad for your gut microbiome. So, that's
not uh going to be good for you or it's
not going to be good for me either.
So, I would avoid that one. Always go
for any yogurt that really has minimum
contents. Just milk and microbes. That's
all you need. Can you bring me the bin?
This is going in the bin. I'm going to
just drop that
in the bin. I did scan on the Zoey app
as well. And my relationship to it was
about 35,
which is not which is not a health food.
Which is not a health food. What about
this? This is definitely healthy. Dr.
Inspector
Activia,
deliciously good for your gut health.
Okay, so I know this one's going to be
good. Um,
what else does it say? We believe that a
happy gut is a happy you. When you love
your gut, it loves you back. It sounds
like you wrote it.
What else? What other claims does it
make? We ferment our unique blend of
five active strain strains for up to
eight hours. So every little pot is
packed with billions of live cultures.
Loving the planet to love our gut.
Activia great for the gut. Healthy.
Well, so far, you know, everything looks
everything looks good, doesn't it? Um,
but let's have a look and see what extra
things they've added to it. Um, which is
always hard to find in packets. You you
often need a microscope to see them. Um,
so for for it to be good, it just needs
microbes and milk and that makes yogurt.
You just change the temperature. That's
what you get. So here we've got um lots
of we've got lots of ingredients. We've
got flavorings. We've got concentrates.
We've got bit of carrot for some reason.
We've got lemon juice. We've got
stabilizers. Uh we've got tapioca
starch. We've got sugars. And it claims
to have strawberries, although when they
last were picked from the earth, I'm not
quite sure. So, um, it's not as bad as
the other one, but basically we're we're
looking at a a highly processed product
that has many chemicals you don't really
want in your gut because they will
counteract the good effect of the gut
microbes. Slightly better than the other
one, but I would still not eat it
myself.
Okay.
And the fact that it's processed, does
the fact that it's processed alone make
it a bad food? Or is it because the
process of processing
causes a loss in the good stuff and
addition of a lot of bad stuff? When we
say pro because this word processed
foods has become just like a blanket
term. So in my brain I go if it's
processed it has to be bad.
But is that accurate? Well, we need to
separate virtually all the food that we
eat and I eat as well is processed.
Yeah.
But um we need to separate that from
ultrarocessed. So plain yogurt, nothing
added, nothing you know changed is
processed because you're mixing a basic
ingredient milk with microbes. You're
actually creating something that's
processing. But it's when you take it to
the next stage and you would make that
same product from say milk powder
uh and then you would add various
starches and stabilizers, emulsifiers,
concentrates, artificial sweeteners,
flavorings, that same yogurt becomes
ultrarocessed.
And it's that extra step that is the
main problem.
Nothing wrong with processed food. You
know, cheese is processed. There's
nothing wrong with that. Most of the
foods we we eat are some have had salt
added or oil added or something like
that. But it's when it's chemicals that
you don't find in your kitchen being
added to to foods that have been
stripped of all their goodness. So, they
wouldn't just use cow's milk. It would
be, you know, dried extract of casein or
um you wouldn't take wheat. It would be
the uh stripped out inner part of that
wheat and then that's temperature
treated to melt it and and change its
composition. And to put these things
back together, you need all these glues
like these emulsifiers. Uh you need
stabilizers, you need um uh flavorings,
sweeteners, colorants, all these extra
things to make it look like food again.
So I think we shouldn't be calling
ultrarocessed food food. That's a
misnomer.
uh we should call them, you know, edible
food-like substances that are
industrially made. And if we start to
realize the difference between these, we
can start to make smart food choices. We
now know that many of these ingredients
there's been lots of even research since
we last talked about um first things
like aspartame has come out as which is
an artificial sweetener has been linked
to many health problems including
increased risk of cancers and uh heart
disease. We've got emulsifiers have come
out uh recently in a number of studies
to show that they affect mental health
and they also affect heart disease even
when you adjust for the whole diet and
you take just that component of the
food. So we know that ultrarocessed
foods are you probably the worst things
we're doing for our diets and then in
the UK
uh the average person is saying about
60% of all their food is ultrarocessed
without knowing about it. We're eating
four times more than uh healthy European
countries who are often poorer than us.
So it's not just a question of money.
It's just become this battle of us poor
consumers against these massive
companies with billions of pounds to
spend on marketing that have told us
this stuff is healthy because of these
fake health halos, vitamins, you know,
no sugar, no this, no fat, confusing the
consumer and all the time giving us
foods that not only make give us disease
but importantly make us overeat.
So we we pick that stuff. Doesn't matter
it's says just whether even if it's just
low fat or it's got lots of other
chemicals, both make you overeat by a
quarter. So you will be hungrier after
eating that than you would be if you had
a completely plain yogurt with none of
those extra chemicals in it. Okay,
so I've got three different drinks here.
I've got my Oasis citrus punch. Um, on
this one it says natural flavorings
and real fruit. So that must be healthy.
Real fruit. If it says real fruit on it,
you should be very suspicious.
Okay, that's the first thing to to look
at it. Uh, and natural flavors. That
really means nothing. And this is
uh natural is a great word. means
nothing uh medically, scientifically,
but it's been a a buzz word for me
getting people to buy stuff. So,
basically, this is a a mixed blend of
citrus fruits, which means the mixtures
of all kinds of different uh fruit
extracts
that's combined with sugar and
artificial sweeteners. They're again
highly processed fruits. They're not
fresh fruits. And it's got a mixture of
those. Uh, it's got citric acid. It's
got sugar, orange flavorings, uh, it's
got stabilizers, uh, polyphosphates,
glycerol esters, uh, it's got, um,
looks like wood resins, um, acidity
regulators, uh, preservatives. It's got
some potassium sorbate, potassium
benzoate. It's got the sweeteners
aspartame and uh ACE K.
Espartain is what you're just talking
about, right?
Yes, that's the one that WHO have just
put on their uh warning list. Um so yes,
it's it's packed with things that you
wouldn't expect if you just squeezed a
bit of juice uh in and thought it was
healthy. So, this is a good example of
um a totally fake ultrarocessed food
that makes it look like it's real fruit
and is going to be healthy for you and
it is just a mix of chemicals that's
just going to mess up your gut microbes
and make you feel hungrier.
Okay, but this one here, this
Philadelphia says light. So, it says
100% of the taste but 40% less fat. So,
Philadelphia Light.
Surely that's
good. Well, it's it's got cheese in it.
It's often have this. We did do some
tests on this a while ago. It does does
have microbes in it. If it's low in fat,
they've generally added something else
to increase the mouth feel. And indeed
we see here it's got stabilizers. It's
got emulsifiers. Uh all these things
that we know uh have effects on your gut
microbes, make you hungrier and can
affect your heart as well. So yeah, I I
would uh avoid that one.
What do we have to I've got a few last
things for you there. What do we have to
look out for on the packaging of these
products? Because interestingly, the one
you have in your hand, the bar there,
the snack bar, on the back of it, they
do admit that it's a little bit
processed. They actually there's a
sentence on the back of it. I'll read
read out says um I was reading it as you
said it says well um well clearly it
would be wrong for us to claim that
everything in this bar is 100% natural
and simply grows on trees obviously some
ingredients need to be cleaned dried and
roasted too and therefore to some extent
processed. It's just that we believe the
less we mess with it the better it
tastes. That's why we never add any
artificial flavors or colors or any
preservatives.
Yeah,
natural bar. I mean, ingredients,
you know, that's a good thing to say.
It's quite hard to produce some of these
snack bars without having things to
stick it together or gums. Glucose
syrup, soya protein,
crispies,
isolate, tapioca starch, salt, dates,
almonds, salt, salted caramel, muscoido,
sugar, buttermilk powder, natural
flavorings, cream powder, milk, rice
flour, carbo flour, and salt.
Yeah, it doesn't when you read it out
like that, it doesn't sound quite as
natural as the uh label suggests, does
it? because you've just got all these
ingredients that are, you know, again,
half of them you wouldn't find in your
in your kitchen. Um, you know, and it's
partly to to, you know, protein packed.
Um, you know, if it was if you just need
the nuts and the seeds, you wouldn't
have to add in all this uh other stuff
from soy and and other beans and things
which are ultrarocessed. They're just
taking that bit of it, combining it
together. So some of these are better
than others. Um but um again this is
ultrarocessed and you know the these all
these snacks interestingly are really
often the downfall in in in place like
the US and the UK where we're just
eating so many so much our our energy is
coming from these snacks which wasn't
the case 20 years ago. So on that point
of snacking,
is snacking good or bad? And what impact
does that have on the overall
nutritional um profile of an individual?
Because a lot of people snack, right?
Nearly everybody snacks.
I think that's right. Over 90% of people
snack. So it's become normal to snack in
this in this country, in the US, it is
the norm. It's not the norm in other
countries. So you see much less snacking
habits in southern Europe uh than you do
here. much less in many Asian countries
as well.
A Zoey study found that 95% of people
were snackers.
Yes.
And 25% of people are undoing the
benefits of healthy meals by unhealthy
snacking.
Yeah. So 95% of people we found in that
Zoey study are snackers and most of them
are unhealthy. So just by reaching for a
snack, unless you're really careful,
you're going to be having not only extra
calories, but unhealthy calories that's
going to undo many of the good things
you you're eating. So we found in the
Zoey survey that people would be really
focusing on their main meal, saying,
"This is a really healthy meal. I'm
having plenty of plants and veget, but
oh well, I've got to have my snack." And
so they'd be undoing all that good by
having something that would then
a couple of hours later really upset um
their metabolism and make them hungrier
and so mess up the the idea and make
them hungrier. So we in the UK and the
US it's around a quarter of our calories
come from snacks. if we were able to
even to reduce that a bit or just change
that snack to a healthy one or ideally
move that snacking time to the meal
itself. Most of these would be much less
harmful if you had them at the end of
your meal
when your body is, you know, starting to
do all this work breaking down the food
is gearing up for this high activity.
Virtually all the snacks that people
have late in the evening are bad for
you. And that's because you're getting a
sugar spike just before going to bed.
Your body's not ready for it. Your gut
microbes are not ready for it. It
doesn't give them a rest. And so you
actually end up hungrier the next day.
So we're starting to realize that it's
not just the food. And we've seen that
most of these snacks are very unhealthy,
going to make you hungrier, but the
timing of it also messes up your
circadian rhythms. So you're not
recovering. And the next day you're
going to feel hungrier than you were if
you didn't snack. So it's like
counterintuitive. You think, oh, if I
have something before I go to bed, I'm
not going to be as hungry tomorrow. And
this is what many people get into this
this common mistake. So we need to start
changing people's attitude uh in in this
snack epidemic about snacks and say, you
know, you don't need them. Um
and if you do, have healthy ones. And
you know, nuts and seeds and fruit are
perfectly healthy ones. And we showed in
our in our study which we published
recently that people who do have those
healthy snacks are really hardly any
extra risk of health problems um
compared to those that people don't
snack as long as it's not late at night.
So if you eat within that sort of normal
eating window and you you know some
people are natural snackers. I don't
know if I'm not, but I know many of my
colleagues at Zoey uh can't go two or
three hours without eating. They really
find it hard. And but just by thinking
more about that snack and saying, "Well,
I'm going to I I know I've got this
tendency. I'm going to eat something
that's healthy."
Nuts or something.
Yeah. just a handful of mixed nuts, an
apple, a pear, um something that's not
super sugary or super fat, but
importantly not ultrarocessed. Not
something that's got this health halo
that says, "Eat me. I've got high in
protein. I'm going to, you know, eat me
and you'll get bigger muscles." Uh, no.
Eat me and you'll get fatter. those
health halos then what are just so we've
summarized them low fat is a health halo
you're saying no sugar real fruit trying
to remember all the ones um
extra vitamins
vitamin labeling on on products um
natural flavorings I think it said yes
one of the products those are those the
main ones have I missed any there
I think we've covered yeah so claims
about low fat low sugar uh nothing
artificial
high protein I guess
natural right?
Uh high protein. Um some would be gut
friendly. Um generally they're warning
signs that this food is to be avoided.
Find something that doesn't need that
health claim. You never see a whole a
real food with a health claim. They
don't need it. You got an apple doesn't
need a claim, you know, contains
vitamins, contains uh fiber. Real foods
don't need health labels.
I've had a confused relationship with
bread.
I I look at bread, all bread, I think
that's bad. This is cheating on my gut
microbiome. Is that the truth? Is bread
bad?
Most bread is bad. Most supermarket
bread is ultrarocessed sugar and
contains many other chemicals you don't
really want in you. Makes you hungrier.
And the general perception of the public
is it's a healthy food. I found this
myself when I started doing my glucose
levels. Even brown breads were all over
the place. There are some breads that I
can eat in small amounts that are still
healthy. Things like rye breads. And if
it's sourdough, that also improves it.
But I think in general, we're eating far
too much bread for most people. There
might be some people who can support it.
And that's why it's good to test your
glucose responses to it. But most bread
has too much sugar, not enough fiber,
too many uh chemicals in it. And uh we
should be looking to other things for
our nutrition. Have it as a rare treat.
Have it just when you go to a restaurant
or whatever. But for most people, you
know, it's it's a real red flag for me.
The other red flag that shocked me was
my relationship with white rice because
I'd grown up eating white rice and I
thought white rice was a great thing to
have after I'd been to the gym with some
chicken. So I I used to whenever I saw
white rice I thought it was great. And
then I looked on Zoe and I had a 15 out
of 100 relationship with white rice and
I think my girlfriend had a five out of
100 relationship with white rice. So I
no longer have white rice. I've swapped
it out for I think quinoa is usually
what we have in the house now. Nearly
any grain is better than right white
rice. It's got more fiber. It's got more
protein in it. It's got more nutrients
in it. And rice is the most overrated
food I think even more so than bread
because yeah, people think it's
healthier than you know having potatoes
or pasta. They associate it with healthy
things because often sometimes the rest
of the meal is actually quite good
and you know vegetable curries or
whatever it is often quite healthy. But
the rice itself is really just sugar and
there's there's no have it as a rare
treat. But so many other grains you can
have instead. Quinoas, barley, oats, um
uh you know, or even putting in lentils
or legumes, you know, beans instead of
that rice just makes it so much
healthier.
Quick one. I discovered a product which
has changed my life called eight sleep.
This product, eight, which are a sponsor
of this podcast, has been a revelation
in my life because the EightLe pod
cover, which is basically a fitted sheet
that goes over your mattress, controls
the temperature of your bed throughout
the night and it follows nature's
natural rhythm. It starts cool, gets
colder while you go into different
phases of sleep and then heats up
slightly as you wake up in the morning,
which is effectively guiding you to have
a deeper, more restorative sleep. Go to
8leep.com, which is ei.com/stephven.
And if you do that, you'll save $150 on
the pod cover that I have on my bed, the
one I'm talking about. Grab your pod
cover, send me a DM, and let me know how
you get on. When you talk about your
habits being so important, I when you're
eating and what you're eating and making
sure that you carve out time to have
your meals, because I was telling you
earlier, I think before we started
recording, that I'm in a bit of a
pattern at the moment of eating my first
meal of the day at like 400 p.m. or 5:00
p.m. because if I'm recording podcast or
I'm doing something in the media or on
TV, I don't like to eat before then. Um,
what is an example of great food habits?
I want to know what what your food
habits are on a perfect day. Say you
know this was your 10 out of 10 day.
When would you eat? How many meals would
you eat? And what times would would and
wouldn't you eat?
Okay. So like you I have very busy days
where sometimes it goes out the window.
And I think we got to realize that you
got to try this sort of 8020 ideal. You
know you're trying to stick to something
80% of the time knowing that 20% it's
out of your control. Don't worry about
it. And if you do that, you can do that
sustainably for decades, right? It's the
people who are obsessed and say, "I
mustn't break it." And if you broken it
one day, okay, end of my brilliant
experiment. That's dafted. So if I'm at
home, for example, working at home, I'm
in control of things. I will not eat
anything before 11:00. I will have a
black coffee because I know um that
wakes me up and I like it and it's also
good for me. But I won't have anything
else until 11:00. I'll go down and I fix
myself my bowl of uh full fat uh yogurt
and I'd put my diversity jar sprinkled
in there and I'd see what else is in the
fridge. So I might have some berries if
they're around at the moment. Plenty of
seasonal berries. might get some from
the freezer if uh we're in the m, you
know, we're in March or something.
There's no no fresh berries. Uh or I
might just chop up an apple and put it
in there. I'm getting my protein. I'm
getting uh fat. You know, I I'm not
feeling hungry. Uh and having a dip in
energy in the middle of the day that I I
would probably have if I hadn't eat
anything.
You said coffee. I have my coffee
because I know it's good for me. Last
time we spoke, you were kind of on the
fence about coffee. You were two trains
of thought about whether it's good for
us or not. You're now saying you think
it's good for us.
Yeah. Well, I must have given the wrong
impression to you, but coffee is
definitely a health food.
Interesting.
Okay. Um there are some people who don't
tolerate it very well. They don't
tolerate the caffeine. A few percent of
people, but even if you have decaf
coffee, it's decent quality because
there's different ways of taking the the
caffeine out. All the studies are now
showing consistently that uh you will
have less heart disease and you'll live
longer if you uh drink coffee and are
having sort of between one and four cups
of coffee a day. That seems to be the
sweet spot. Bit more than that, you've
probably got some problem. You know that
coffee is actually a fermented plant.
So people don't think of it that way.
They think, "Oh, it just comes in a jar.
You know, I don't need to worry about
it." But actually, you know, it comes
off a a tree. You get this pod, this
bean. Um, you take it off, you break it
up, it then gets fermented on the floor
of usually, you know, wherever it is in
Africa or Asia, where wherever it is,
and it's humid. The microbes are working
on it, breaking it down. Then you go and
dry it and uh roast it and that ends up
being the coffee we have. So, the
microbes are playing a role in that.
It's also a source of fiber. So, three
cups of coffee gives you around five
grams of fiber, which is about a quarter
of your uh the average UK or US amount.
So, you know, it's not the main source
of fiber, but it all helps. And in the
US, it's often the main source of fiber
uh that they get. So polyphenols the
fiber um also for many people it gets
them awake and alert has that effect of
stopping tiredness. So if you if you're
careful with it you don't overdose on it
and you know it doesn't give you heart
fluctuations it's going to be actually
beneficial for you long term. So this is
a great example of a food that we've
totally changed our minds on over the
years. I initially my first research
paper I ever wrote was that um coffee
causes cancer.
Okay. So when I was a I was actually a
medical student and I was very proud of
my paper and this is great and it was
based on very poor studies done in the
1980s and it was complete rubbish. Um so
I'm very happy that to go and correct
that mistake and tell people that you
know you should much better to drink
coffee than say orange juice
and orange juice is tends to be in the
health section and coffee definitely in
the sort of recreational
uh section and they really should be
changed over. Most orange juice we have
is ultrarocessed high sugar very bad for
most people. coffee is good for the vast
majority of people.
What else have you been wrong about?
What else have you changed your mind
about over the last couple of years
because of the research that you now
have? You know, the data you now have
access to and the research that you've
done.
Uh well, I was keen to avoid fats for a
long time. Um I cut back on cheese
because I thought that's high in
saturated fats, that can't be good for
you. I would have bought low-fat
products before. Um, and so that most
doctors were indoctrinated with that and
many doctors are still in that mindset
that fat is bad and car, you know, carbs
and starch are good. um drinking lots of
water was good for you.
And I now having researched it for the
book know there's no hard data that you
should be drinking eight um glasses of
water for example a day which is what
most of the um recommended government
sites tell you. And obviously the drinks
industry is very keen to support that
because you know the big companies the
the Cokes the Pepsis have moved into the
water business and they're trying to
sell everyone plastic bottled water
which is terrible for the planet. The
idea that uh we're all deprived of
hydration and having all kinds of
problems with it is is really made up.
There's no hard evidence at all. And if
you look at um doctors who work on
marathons, they see that far more people
die or have health problems from
overhydrating
in uh the marathon race than than
dehydrating. So the human body is really
good at some things. You know, you think
about our ancestors, they kind of knew
when you were thirsty, right? It's like,
hang on, this is quite a, you know, and
the idea that, oh, we've got no idea if
we're thirsty or not. um we need to be
eating, you know, have a stopwatch to
tell us to drink every hour on the hour
is obviously nonsense when you think
about it. That's so true. My um for my
birthday just gone, someone brought me
this massive
like what's a way to describe it? Barrel
water bottle and it has like eight
liters marked on the side of it. And
they said to me when they gave it to me,
you need to drink that every day. And so
the idea was that I put it on my desk as
a reminder that I need to drink that
whole barrel before I finish work.
Oh, I mean, you just think about it.
Well, you know, we've been evolving for
millions of years, and you know, you
can't live long without water.
Um, so clearly we a pretty good
mechanism we've inherited to tell us
when we need to drink water and when we
don't. And I I I just think that's uh
again marketing uh concept. All the soft
drink the you know all this rehydration
these electrolytes all this stuff it's
it's largely nonsense and it's just you
know again like the protein marketing
idea is that uh and we're very
susceptible to it because we like a a
quick fix or and there'll be a few
people that say I feel better when I
drink lots of water. Sure, you know, but
the idea that uh we're so out of control
that, you know, someone needs to bring
us water every hour uh is madness and
that there is, you know, there isn't
this variation.
We got up to your lunch, so we did your
breakfast sounded nice. Your lunch, what
time do you typically eat lunch and what
do you typically have on a 10 out of 10
day where everything's going to plan?
I mean, it all varies and you know, I
think I don't want to give the idea I'm
always having the same lunch because I I
do try and vary it. Um, but if I'm on my
own working, I'm not with friends or
whatever. Um, it would be a fairly quick
affair and it would probably be a salad.
Um, and I would
get a lettuce or um a grated cabbage. I
would throw whatever I have in the
fridge in there and I would add some
protein to it. So, I would add some
beans. I always keep cans of beans
around. They cost nothing. They're huge
source of fiber and protein. Tip those
in. They might be lentils. They might be
um chickpeas. Might be standard mixed
beans. And um I'd put them in. If I had
some cheese, I might chop that up. might
put a bit of mozzarella in there, olive
oil, um balsamic vinegar. Um that' be
it. And if I'd had some sauerkraut or
something, I might have that on the
side, bit of ferment. And I've
increasingly recently since my I've been
doing more research on this, I might
make my salad dressing actually with
some fermented milk, some keier.
And you just mix up the oil in vinegar
and you just at the last minute add in
your uh ferment. So you're actually
getting probiotics added to that that if
I'm on my own
and a hurry that's that's probably what
yeah reason but it would vary depending
on what I was taking what fruits what
vegetables and yeah I would have fruit
afterwards.
What kind of fruit do you do you like? I
am I noticed on my Zoey app that bananas
rank incredibly low for me. I think my
ranking on a banana out of 100 is 50.
Now, I've been eating bananas like a
monkey. I've always thought bananas were
just fantastic. So, I thought unlimited
bananas were a great idea until I saw
the Zoey app and it said my score is 50
out of 100. Now, I've used up on the
bananas and I'm having much more berries
because I do really well for red berries
in particular. In fact, the order that I
the Zoey had um fruits in is raspberries
were number one, cherries were number
two, strawberries were third, then
pears, then peaches, then apples, then
kiwis, then blueberries, then grapes,
and then bananas were like 10th, 50 out
of 100.
Well, I scored him worse than you. You'd
be pleased to know. Um I used to eat
lots of bananas and it was a thing you
just put in your backpack. Comes in its
own packaging. You know, you can have it
when you want. I thought this is super
healthy because I've seen, you know,
Roger Federer um ate lots of bananas,
you know, he seemed pretty fit. Um and
that's way we associated with with a
marketing thing. Oh, lots of potassium,
you know, must be good for us really.
Lots of sugar and they're not they're
not great for us. Uh my score was about
30 or something. So, it so I I still
have them occasionally because I, you
know, enjoy them occasionally, but I
don't have them every day like I used
to. So, I now swapped them out for
pears. We have some great pears in this
country, and they're always good. Uh,
apples and again, I'll have my my
berries if if I've if I've got them. So,
um, and and, uh, kiwi fruits. I had to
also give up grapes. I used to eat lots
of grapes and I used to love them, but
get huge sugar spike with grapes, which
I know then, you know, would make me
hungrier for the rest of the day. So,
um, and I have them as a a treat. You
know, you might have some grapes once a
month. They're still fine. So, I think
we shouldn't ever say, "I'll never have
those again." It's just like, what's
your staple?
Mhm.
Uh, what do you have? Most of the time,
should you be swapping that for
something just as tasty or nice or a
mixture of things? But
get out of that rut just because someone
told you that, you know, bananas good
has potassium in it and make you play
tennis better. You know, it was it's
that kind of mindset that we we really
need to change. And um
and I guess it depends what else is on
the plate. I remember Fria, who's the
head of nutrition at Zoey, um her
telling me that
the plate itself has its overall score.
So if I had, you know, maybe something
that wasn't so good in isolation, but
with a couple of other things that are
really high ranking in terms of health
in gut microbiome, then the overall
score comes up and it's really the
average of the whole plate.
Yeah, it's exactly. I don't we the idea
is we don't want to demonize one little
thing. So, you might be obsessed with
mayonnaise, for example, you know, and I
say to you, well, you can have a small
amount of mayonnaise if it's going to
make you eat a salad.
Mhm.
And if that salad is high fiber,
nutritious, it's got plenty of good
things in it, herbs and etc, etc., etc.,
or you know, a tiny bit of ketchup or
whatever, you know, I'd still be saying,
yeah, you can try something else instead
of those, but don't get hung up about
it. And I think it's absolutely true
that you know nutrition has gone into
this idea of this this is wrong this
gives you cancer this is this is bad and
meat is a great example of that debate
you know people ask me are you you know
are you for meat are you against meat um
and I I've sort of changed I flipped on
this as the evidence has changed I'm
definitely against processed meats
ultrarocessed meats which are lowquality
stuff put together in ready meal s, etc.
You know, you'd be much better off just
having mushrooms or or beans instead of
that mixed with it, a vegetarian version
of it. But real high quality meat in
small amounts,
nothing really wrong with it as long as
you have enough space on the rest of the
plate to make up for it.
What about the carnivore diet?
Well, I keep getting probably like you,
you know, people come and say, you know,
I heard you talking about um, you know,
not eating plants is bad, but I've been
living for two years on the carnivore
diet. I feel great, you know. And I say,
fine, there might be one in 10,000
people uh, that can exist with zero
fiber and zero plants and, you know, uh,
you know, in uh, in the near the North
Pole, etc., Sure, there are people who
exist on highfat and high protein diets.
They've evolved for it. But vast
majority of people will suffer greatly
by having
a denuded gut microbiome. And
just eating meat is not what our
ancestors did anyway. Um, I've lived
with the Hadza tribe for a week and they
eat a lot of vegetables and and and
fruits and berries and nuts and seeds
and they still meat is a treat and three
months of the year they have no meat
because it's hard to catch, but they've
got all this other stuff. So, the idea
that it's natural, that's what we did is
is really wrong. And some people might
feel better briefly. You know, there's a
difference between how people respond to
uh fats particularly uh and carbs. So,
you might lose a bit of weight. A lot of
that's actually uh they've done some
studies showing people on high keto,
highfat protein diets, they lose weight
quicker,
but a lot of it is water.
Oh, okay.
So, they're sort of drying out. And in a
way, sometimes bodybuilders do that to
make them look more toned. But actually,
long term, they don't lose that. uh and
it comes back and the main problem is
their gut microbes are really crying out
for food. So you're starving your gut
microbes if you're just on a meatonly
diet. So there's no evidence that that
is healthy and lots of evidence that
lack of fiber is really bad for you. So
remember that statistic we went back to
just a five gram change in fiber. So if
these people, you know, so if the
average uh is 20 grams a day and a
carnivore diet person is on five or
less, then you we're talking, you know,
50% increases in heart disease and
reduced longevity. So, you know, people
do what they want, but the the data
absolutely doesn't support it. Another
thing that I have every day is chewing
gum. And I was in the car because it's
in the center console of of the car that
I that I'm driven around in the Dio car
we call it. And there's like seven
different types of chewing gum. Now when
I eat this chewing gum, it's there's
this explosion of sweetness in my in the
first couple of bites. And I I I was
thinking the other day as I was driving
home, I was thinking I think I'm
becoming a little bit compulsive. Like I
didn't need the chewing gum for any
other reason than I think there's this.
It's doing something in my brain. I grab
it. I put one in. I throw it in the bed.
I grab another I threw it in the bin and
I think I'm just doing it for that sugar
burst. My question is broadly about
chewing gum, but are these artificial
sweeteners that exist in the chewing
gums that I'm probably eating
worse than just normal sugar.
They're better for your teeth.
Okay.
So, you will get less tooth decay.
Yeah.
By having the artificial sweeteners, but
most of them will be causing problems to
your gut microbes.
Okay. and not your mouth microbes as
well. So, anything you mess with in your
mouth and your saliva, things like mouth
washes as well, these artificial ones,
they're all shown to reduce your natural
gut microbes and actually cause more
problems so that you're more prone to
infections and actually more prone to
get overgrowth of bad microbes giving
you bad breath. So,
you know, you have this initial hit
which, you know, often the mouthwashes
are similar in a way to that sort of
instant gratification of the chewing gum
because it feels fresh and tangy in your
in your mouth, but you're often killing
off the good guys that are protecting
your your your mouth. And the worry I
have is about this sweetness is it's
it's sensitizing you to want more sweet
foods. So it probably make you hungrier
for more carb foods later in the day.
Mhm.
So I don't think there's anything
particularly bad about chewing gum per
se. Um other than if people chew a lot
of it sugary, you know, it will give you
more uh uh dental decay.
But the artificial sweeteners are
probably worse because they're having a
negative effect on the gut micro on the
all the microbes from your mouth down to
your gut.
Mouthwash. I am a prolific mouthwash
user. Oh dear.
I know. And
they've done actual studies on this to
show that um you know, yes, customer
consumers like it, you know, so like you
probably like that feel of being fresh
and doing something and having a tang in
the mouth a bit like a you know, a tangy
chewing gum as well. Um a mint or, you
know, there's something nice in the
brain that that says this is good. But
if you do it too much, you start to
deform, you know, destroy your natural
defense mechanism and microbes in your
tongue and your saliva are there to
fight off other bugs and you're more
likely to get um overgrowth of the wrong
ones and you may actually end up having
worse smelling breath long term uh than
if you weren't using these chemicals.
The topics I'm about to throw at you are
very complicated and you're very good at
simplifying things. So everything I'm
about to throw at you typically has a
whole industry of people behind it that
have over complicated it and are selling
courses about it and different hacks and
tr tips and tricks. If you could I would
ask you just to give me a simple
solution to the things that I'm going to
throw at you. The first one is weight
loss.
There's not a simple solution. You have
to
do something that's sustainable for long
periods of time. So, forget the idea
that it's really important to lose
weight over a few weeks. You want
something that can maintain your weight
at a good level for decades. And if you
are have a problem with
really excess weight, you're uh
extremely obese, morbidly obese, um you
need something radical.
diets are not going to do it. You need
one of these new drugs um the uh GLP1s,
these injections, thempics, the
wiggoies, or you need beriatric surgery
to get you down to that level. Something
dramatic for most people.
What do you think of those new drugs,
thempics? And
I think they're amazing
really
for people that really need it.
What about for
Not for you. Not for you. Well, I've got
lots of friends that are in seemingly
great shape that are taking these new
weight loss drugs and all that stuff.
Well, they're mad.
Why?
There are lots of side effects that um
aren't worth the benefits.
Not the benefits if you have any minor
weight problems. the the benefits
outweigh the risks if you are so obese
that your chance, you know, your 50/50
chance of having a heart dise heart
heart attack in the next or a stroke in
the next five years. So people with
morbid obesity have a worse prognosis
than people with cancer. So it's, you
know, like I've got cancer. What do I
do? I'll take a drug. I'll accept that
it's got some side effects, but you
know, I want to live. And they do work
for vast majority of people. for people
who have only minor uh levels of uh
obesity just you know some love handles
or whatever
to cut out your all your appetite
signals in your brain. We don't know
what that does long term and we don't we
do know that it it has can affect your
pancreas. It can uh cause some rare
cancers. It can do other stuff to your
digestive system that we're still you
know a long way away from knowing. So
it's it's a drug for extreme obese
problems that we've created through our
ultrarocessed foods and people with
terrible diabetes etc. It is not
something for uh the general population.
So for for those people
it's firstly improving the quality of
your your diet is number one. So get
down from an average of 60%
ultrarocessed food to something less
than 20%.
find a consistent way to
that's that's the first thing to do. And
then the next thing is to change your
mindset about
things. Don't get obsessed with with
calories. Start thinking about eating
your 30 plants a week because that will
naturally give you all the fiber and uh
change your appetite signals as well.
The fitness community were quite
disgruntled last time. I probably
disgruntled again now
when you said what you said about
calories because a lot of people do rely
on the calories in calories out
system for weight loss.
Yeah. Well, obesity experts don't. So,
it may be fine in gyms to talk about
that. That's old science. We now know
that that this calorie model from a
practical point of view is completely
broken because we've been not talking
about the quality of food, the structure
of food, all these different effects,
these interindividual effects that we're
talking about. Meaning that counting
calories is for vast majority of people
impossible or meaningless. So it it's
and it's the the marketing and the
companies who are selling us these low
calorie products. This idea that it's
really simple. All you got to do is X,
Y, and Zed. You'll lose weight. That's
what we're fighting here. And they may
have influenced, you know, the gyms with
their uh special drinks and programs and
people wanting the crash course of come
in here, you'll lose all this. You
you'll gain muscle, you'll lose weight.
You know, it's easy.
The evidence is very clear that if you
restrict calories, you will lose weight,
but 80% of people regain it pretty
quickly and will actually go over the
other end if they haven't changed their
diet in terms of quality and taken care
of what they're eating. And there's good
evidence that people that follow uh a
program where they are not focusing on
calories, but they are focusing on food
quality. Um they're looking at their
sugar peaks, they're looking at their
fat levels, they're looking at their gut
microbes, they are looking at the time
of day they're eating, they're looking
at the how to eat just thoughtfully
and not talking about fat levels and you
know
avoiding all these foods that we've been
talking about. they will consistently
lose small amounts of weight. Not large
amounts, but small consistent amounts
that don't make them more hungry. And
the key is do things that don't make you
hungrier. The reason calorie restriction
doesn't work is our evolution tells us
to ramp up the appetite uh the hunger
signal. Obvious, you know, uh it's the
same way if you do exercise, it makes
you hungrier. We have this inbuilt
mechanism. That's why the only drugs
that
methods that work are these drugs like
um
ampic wiggoi that act on the appetite.
They act on the brain. They from the gut
sends a signal to the brain switches off
the appetite signal. Otherwise
you you just reduce calories or you
increase exercise. That appetite signal
is just going right up there and you can
carry on resisting it for a while. Most
people have tried this. They know and it
gets harder and harder every week and
then suddenly you crack and then you
say, "Oh, I've I've given up now. I'm
I'm back." And often you swing above it.
Yo-yo.
Yeah. And that and that yo-yoing is
probably the worst thing you can do
because it just makes your you know,
you've got no consistency. On that point
of exercise, there was a lot of
contention last time we spoke around the
subject matter of exercise because a lot
of people go out and do cardiovascular
exercise. is they run on a running
machine in order to try and lose weight.
But you and many other people that I've
spoken to have said that that's not a
great strategy for weight loss.
Yes. The lots of studies have done and
said people are trying, you know, to
lose weight conventional by conventional
means. We're not talking the Zoey
method, but the oldfashioned ways of
calorie restriction or, you know,
changing to keto diets or whatever it
is. And if those people are put on
exercise or no exercise at the same
time, does it help them? And uh
generally it doesn't. Okay. So um and if
you do exercise alone
um then there's no evidence as many
people gain weight as lose weight on
exercise. So you think why is that?
Well,
if you think it through, exercise
uh is a and I'm not knocky XI. I
exercise every day. I love it. It's
great for my brain and my heart and
everything else and reduces lots of
diseases. But people have got to
separate that from weight loss if we're
going to make any progress here. And if
you got too much, you know, excess fat
on your body, exercise alone is a
terrible way to deal with it because
you're like saying, "I'm not going to
deal with my diet. I'm just going to run
it off in the gym and keep taking my
supplements and do everything else. And
what happens for most people is that
their metabolism slows down. The signals
of hunger increase
after exercise. And
psychologically people think, "Oh, well,
I've done some exercise. I've burnt off
those calories. You know, I can have
that donut or whatever." And so
subconsciously they're also maybe
snacking slightly more
than they would be. And that's why for
most people it doesn't work. Now I know
people got upset last year but some
people it does work.
And this is probably there's a different
response. We don't all respond to
exercise with appetite signals exactly
the same way. But for as many people it
did work. There are people that made
them actually put on weight. Do you see
what I mean? That's why the studies show
no difference. So you always find
someone who writes to you say, "Stephen,
this guy's an idiot because I, you know,
I did this and I lost uh, you know, 10
kilos." But this, you know, exactly
someone else will say, "I did this and I
gained 10 kilos and I thought I was
doing the right thing." So the point is,
you can't rely on it. And it's when
there's something obviously modifiable
like your diet, it's so easy. We've got
so much choice now and what to eat.
We're not forced to eat ultrarocessed
foods or lowfat this or or whatever. You
know, we can make those choices. We
should be doing that. Not trying to
saying am I lucky? Am I that small
percentage of person that can do this
purely from working out more in the gym?
Supplements you mentioned there. That's
the next thing I wanted to ask you about
supplements, vitamins. My
house used to be stacked with
supplements. And then after our
conversation last time round, I look at
them, most of them, like they've lied to
me. Like I've been a victim of marketing
of sorts. And I've got every bloody
supplement. I've got your omega-3,
vitamin D, electrolytes, calcium, you
name it, it's still in my house.
Mhm.
What is your view on these supplements?
Well, in general, my view hasn't changed
at all. that the vast majority of
supplements are completely worthless.
But there are some that are useful for
some people some of the time
like
um like there are some people who have
vitamin D deficiency who
black people
um yes uh some black people black
darkkinned people living in places with
very low you know if they're living in
Scotland uh and they might have poor
diets that don't have much vitamin D in
it those people could probably do with
do with some supple suppmentation over
winter
because they produce less vitamin D than
people with lighter skin.
Yes. The
lighter skin evolved as a mutation uh as
uh humans came out of Africa in order in
order to survive in lower sunlight
areas. So naturally uh whiter skinned
people have a they're less protected
against the sun but they have a better
vitamin D production system. So
generally darker skin have more
problems. So I used to see many patients
uh and often they don't go in the sun
either because culturally uh you know
they cover themselves up and so that
that's a problem. So there definitely
are people who can take benefit from
taking some of these vitamin. I'm not
saying that at all but the idea that
everybody should be taking them is just
madness. uh there's no evidence that in
my field of osteoporosis that taking
vitamin D and calcium actually prevents
uh osteoporosis or bone disease.
Although for years and years and years
we thought it did, but all the big
studies now show that's not true. If you
take calcium, uh all the studies are
suggesting that not only does it not
have any benefit in terms of uh bone or
muscle health, but it can adversely
affect your heart. So, because the
calcium you get in in capsules or
supplements, you're taking one big lump
of it at a time rather than getting it
in your green vegetables, which would be
slowly broken down and absorbed in your
gut in ways that your body can deal
with. So, you're getting this, it's like
someone injecting it into your vein,
is very different to being slowly given
it uh throughout 24 hours as the way
nature intended. What what supplements
then could most of us benefit from
taking?
If you have a good diet, you won't need
any supplements.
But most of us don't have a good diet.
So, so what do you do? Do you promote
supplements and say, "Don't worry about
your diet," which is what the marketing
companies want and the vitamin companies
want. They want us to forget the diet.
Keep the ultrarocessed food stuff
coming. Keep it all coming, guys. this
junk food, no real whole foods, no
plants, no fruits. That's fine. You guys
are going to need some vitamins. And
that may be true for people on very poor
diets, you know, only eat beige food.
Maybe they do need some uh supplements,
but I think there's no evidence.
However, there is very little evidence
that people who do take supplements are
any healthier than people that don't
take supplements. So it's not so you
could say people say oh it's like an
insurance policy I'm taking this
insurance policy therefore that's a
really good reason to take multivitamins
etc. And I've heard that said even from
some epidemiologists and doctors but to
my mind uh just as likely to do you harm
as it is to do you any good and it
definitely is affecting your wallet.
What about omega-3? I take that as well.
The trials of that have shown it doesn't
work uh for reducing heart disease or um
any other major disease unless you've
just had a heart attack.
Alcohol. I've just given up alcohol. Not
really told anybody this, but about two
months ago now, I decided that I could
see no net positive in my life. There
wasn't any sort of social lubricant,
which sometimes people site as being the
reason to drink alcohol. So, I gave it
up entirely and and it's been really an
interesting experiment in giving up
alcohol. I was one of the people that
sat right on the fence. Didn't think I
had a bad relationship with it. Um,
didn't have a huge reason to drink it.
Didn't drink it that often anyway. And
then I decided one day I'll run the
experiment of just quitting and see what
it's like. And there's been multiple
situations where just out and about
waiters who are maybe a little bit
poorly trained have literally tried to
force me to drink alcohol. Like one
particular waiter was like, "Go on. This
is not alcohol. this is art. I'm just
going to leave the bottle here right in
front of you if you change your mind.
That one particular waiter. Um and then
all the other social context where
you're just like for it's just assumed
that you drink. What is your stance on
alcohol?
Well, you certainly don't need it. Okay.
So um
most the studies are pretty consistent
say that the more alcohol you drink the
more your chances of all kinds of
diseases and problems.
There are some exceptions to that that
comes down often to Mediterranean
effect. People who drink a glass or two
of red wine do seem to have less heart
disease,
but they won't be protected from other
conditions. So, they won't be protected,
you know, from cancers or um uh some
strokes etc. and lifespan is sort of
unclear in that particular group. So, in
general, alcohol is bad for you. There's
no no doubt. But and so if you don't
drink, I don't think I would say to you,
Stephen, you're wrong. You need to be
start drinking uh red wine.
But for those people who who do drink or
drink occasionally small amounts, what I
would say to you is do
there are some drinks that are healthier
than others. And red wine is one that's
been shown to reduce by about 30% your
risk of a heart disease in most studies.
And it's not clear absolutely clearcut,
but if you drink too much, it's actually
goes bad again for you. So, it's really
quite a small window. Um, and there
might be some other drinks in the future
that might be healthy. And this comes
back to plants because when you're
drinking wine, you're drinking fermented
grapes, right? So, the alcohol is bad.
Fermented grapes are good.
So, in the future, I'd like to see us
getting nearly zero alcohol wines. And
they they are coming. And I I I tasted
some from Canada etc. where you can get
like a 1% wine that you can't 1% by the
way is someone seen kombuchas you can't
metabolize it you don't notice it and if
they have all those benefits they could
be that new era of actually healthy
alcohols and there might be some ciders
as well because they've got the skin of
the apple but virtually all the other
alcohols uh have no real uh health
benefit. What about sleep and the gut
microbiome?
I've I've wondered if there was a
connection between how well I sleep.
Sleep has become this obsession in my
life. I I feel like I'm a competitive
sleeper now. Uh I really enjoy the
process. I've seen the variance in a
well-slept night and a poorly slept
night on how on my mood um how I
perform, how I'm how my brain works.
What does the research say about the
role that sleep plays on our gut
microbiome and on our nutrition?
They're all interlin. So, a bad night's
sleep means that the next day you're
going to have a bigger sugar spike to
the same bagel or uh breakfast that you
had.
Sorry. Sorry. If I have a bad night's
sleep, the same food will give me a
bigger sugar spike.
Yes. So,
it upsets all of your metabolism, right?
So, as you were saying, I feel better
after a good night's sleep. Your body's
metabolism is also different. So, a
disrupted night's sleep means that uh
your body will overreact to sugar.
You're more likely to have a sugar dip
after it and feel tired. And you're more
likely to feel hungry and crave more
carbohydrates after a bad night. And I
think most people listening will think
of that. said, "Yeah, I've had a really
rotten night's sleep." You sort of get
up and you your body craves something to
to help you through this, you know, and
everything is is out of a sink. And
people who are sleeping poorly
will have uh less healthy gut microbes
than those that don't. We we don't yet
know which way round that relationship
goes, whether sleep is driving the
microbiome or the microbiome is is
affecting sleep, but we know they're
interrelated. So the other thing we've
shown is that generally as you found our
body likes to a consistent pattern of
activity and rest. So going to sleep at
the same time, waking up the same time
is really good for your body. You feel
better and nourished. Now if people are
say changing by a couple of hours, hour
and a half, two hours at the weekends,
they're sleeping later and waking up
later. This affects also their sugar
responses and their gut microbes. So we
know that this consistency of approach
is really important for everything in
your body. Now, it doesn't mean I don't
want to tell people they should never go
out or party because, you know, social
networking is great fun. But just think
of that in mind, particularly if it's in
your control and it's just, you know,
watching another Netflix movie, you
know, because it's the weekend may not
be the smartest thing to do if you want
to feel really good long term. And it's
this consistency is coming out again um
linking this this idea of nutrition, how
we respond to food, but also involving
our gut microbes. So yeah, sleep is
incredibly important. It's all part of
the holistic message.
Someone told me that the the time when
we eat is setting our circadian rhythm
more than
many other things that we do. I used to
think that light was the thing that was
had the greatest influence over my
circadian rhythm, my like internal
body's clock, what time my body thinks
it is, but food has a big impact on that
circadian rhythm. So,
absolutely. Yeah. All the studies are
pointing to that. So, I used to think
like you that yeah, you know, when I was
going to the US or whatever, the most
important thing was to get out there and
get in the sunlight and whatever and not
worry about my meals and just eat
because when I'm jetlagged, I was always
hungry anyway. M
but now you know really focusing on
fasting and trying to eat at the time of
where you're the time zone you're trying
to fit into is much more important than
than sunlight. So yeah, meal timings are
increasingly important in science and I
think this is one of the really new
exciting areas and it all fits in with
this idea of, you know, getting your
your rest periods really well worked
out, your activity periods, not messing
them up, not eating when you're supposed
to be resting and uh not doing things
out of sync. And so the people that do
deal with uh time changes and jet lag,
generally they're often fasting on
planes now, not eating all the food
that's offered and and thinking about
what how they want to kickstart their
new clock when they when they get to
their destination.
So this idea that I had of getting my
assistant to schedule what time I work
out every day and what time I eat every
day is a good idea.
Yes. As long as it doesn't become
obsessional,
I would say because some people of that
with me.
So, you know, people listening, I think
these are often good ideas, but again,
if you go for the 8020 rule because you
can get obsessed about anything, whether
it's exercise, it's training, it's
sleeping, and then you get anxious about
it if you don't do it every day. So,
realize it's important, but realize some
things are more important than your
schedule. Okay? And things like friends
and having fun and and you know,
absolutely crucial. And this is all part
of our, you know, philosophy we've been
trying to build with Zoe is about food
is about enjoyment. And we we mustn't
break it down to mathematical formulas
all the time. Got to realize that life
is important to do everything. Uh, and
you know, we can all have a day off.
My last question, I think, is maybe one
that
nobody's asked you before.
I'm sure a lot of people have probably
asked you it. Um,
I'm a dog owner. I've got a little
French bulldog who's 8 years old now
called Pablo.
When I was pouring his food out today,
it dawned on me that his food is
heavily, heavily, heavily processed. Do
you have any advice on what we should be
feeding our pets, our dogs, our cats?
Before we started Zoe, I did think of
doing a gut dog dog microbiome u map my
pet uh project. And I did look into
this, but so I'm not up to date on it,
but there's lots of evidence that the
the food the pellets uh I used to give
our dogs, which I thought were great,
are the equivalent of ultrarocessed
foods, just like you said, and that dogs
who are given whole foods live longer
and have less diabetes, put on weight
less, and are much healthier. So I
believe that the same thing that applies
to humans applies to dogs. the canned
stuff that smelled horrible as is they
still use that, but we were told that
the pellets were healthier and because
they contained all these extra vitamins
and it was this concentrated source that
was perfect for them. And if you look at
it, it's exactly the same as
ultrarocessed food. And that's probably
why our pets are getting as obese as we
are. They're getting diabetes, they're
getting chronic diseases, they're
getting arthritis. And I think there is
some evidence, I'm not sure how good it
is, that if you convert them to whole
food diets, whole meats, just eating the
same that uh we would might be eating or
eating our our scraps, they will do
better. So maybe you should try that.
I I I do I was thinking this when I saw
the numbers. I heard that Zoe now has
more than 100,000 members and I thought,
you know, getting to look at the data of
100,000 people. I'm not saying that you
look at the data, but just having access
to the patterns and the insights that
you get from such a huge amount of
people, many of which tens of thousands
of which are inputting food diaries
every day. You must have had so many
like Eureka moments or incredible
insights from that bird's eye view that
like there must be some things that are
just you you've grown in conviction and
passion about because of that
perspective.
Well, we're seeing things that we've
never seen before. We've discovered
4,000 new species of micro just, you
know, in the last few months. Uh each of
these could be totally novel or useful
for therapeutics um or diagnostics. Uh
we found things like this this parasite,
the blastoystus.
Um we're finding links with new foods
that we could start to give people
advice on about which which foods to eat
to improve which microbe. And you know,
as we go forward in the future, we'll be
able to perhaps predict micro uh
combinations that look like they might
prevent cancer and uh heart disease or
interact with your medications to make
anti-depressants more effective or
hormone replacement treatment more
effective. So I think it's all happened
so fast and it uh and it's just
incredible that the response that we've
had Zoe and the people are all
contributing their data to this
community that I you know very soon
we're going to be a million people and
it's such an exciting time for
scientists like myself knowing that uh
you know we're going to unravel all
these secrets and uh who knows where
it's going to lead.
last time I asked you a question because
because when we share so much advice on
food, I think it's it's nice to close on
an overarching principle,
nice overarching philosophy for
everybody to take away from this
conversation and everything we've
discussed. What in your words would that
overarching principle or philosophy be
towards our health and our nutrition and
our diets?
You can't go wrong if you do things that
are going to be good for your gut
microbes.
And so thinking on behalf of your gut
microbes or your pets as you call them,
think what would they want to eat? How
would they want you to behave? And if
you do that, you're going to be eating
all the right things and avoiding all
the bad things. And all the rest
generally follows. I think that's the
simplest advice I can. you know, if and
realizing that when you eat food, you
know, you're not alone. You've got these
trillions of microbes there waiting for
your every move and your choice.
The closing tradition on this podcast is
that the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest, not knowing who
they're going to leave it for. And I
love this because it changes direction a
little bit. The question that's been
left for you is, what is a modern
positive vision of masculinity?
Did you save that one especially for me
other
[Laughter]
um
have you got sons?
I've got a son. Yes.
Um so I got to think like him. Have I?
Um
what's a positive vision for his
masculinity and a modern one?
It's probably someone who's prepared to
go 50/50 on all the chores in the house
at the moment. I think that's the uh uh
I think masculinity is going through a
tough time at the moment
and um I think uh realize there is a
revolution going on. So, I think it's
it's definitely about being flexible.
Mhm.
And losing a lot of those those
stereotypes and uh going with the flow.
That's what I would advise him.
Too late for me, but um
it's a confusing thing. That's what the
guest was talking about how young men
are very confused in their masculinity,
what it means, what it is to be a man,
what it's not to be a man these days and
really trying to give he was that guest
was really trying to give men an answer
for that question of like young you know
masculinity because the data shows young
men are suffering um tremendously if you
look at the suicide rates or if you look
at the you know um employment rates or
the education rates or uh dating all
those in those areas. So there's a bit
of a, as you say, a revolution going on
in masculinity and what it means to be a
man.
Yeah. Don't be ashamed to be male, but
be flexible and try to adapt to the the
changing world. I think that's that's
it.
Tim, thank you so much. Thank you for
your wisdom. You've definitely changed
my life. And I know from all the
feedback I got in our last conversation,
you've changed the lives of many, many
people through your work, but also more
broadly through what Zoe's doing. I can
only speak for myself. Obviously, I'm I
have a relationship with Zo. I'm an
investor in the company and I they
sponsor the podcast. But in my life, the
key the significant changes that I've
seen because of the insight and the the
fact that Zoe has turned the lights onto
my nutrition have been I for pretty much
my whole life I had gut problems and I
didn't really know why and I just
accepted it. I had was always bloated,
had pains in my um my gut and I just
thought it was normal, you know? I
thought, as a lot of people probably
think, I thought I was broken in some
way and this was just the way that my
body was born. And then as I've done
this podcast, I've realized to not
accept this idea that I was born broken
in any area of my life and to to look a
little bit more about how there might be
a misalignment between what my body
wants and what the modern world is
giving it. And through Zoe, I was able
to completely remove that um decadel
long pain in my gut by focusing on foods
that had a good relationship with me.
So, I thank Zoe for that and I thank you
for that and the work that you do in
spreading the message because a lot of
the things you say, you know,
they ruffle feathers and they and I
think I think when things are positively
disruptive, it's an inevitability that
they ruffle feathers because there is an
incumbent that has experienced cognitive
dissonance. There's an incumbent that
feels threatened or challenged in such a
way. But I think that's how innovation
and positive change occurs. So, thank
you.
Pleasure. Hope it works.
[Music]
Let's talk about Zoey, who you may know
because they're a sponsor of this
podcast and I'm an investor in the
company. You guys know health is my
number one priority. Zoe's growth story
has been absolutely incredible so far.
They're doing science at a scale that
I've never seen before. Because of their
members and recent breakthroughs and
research, they can now continue to offer
the most scientifically advanced gut
health test on the market. Previously,
the test allowed them to analyze 30
bacteria types in your gut. But now,
thanks to new science, they've
identified a hundred bacteria types.
This is a huge step forward, and there's
nothing else that's available, even
close to it, on the market at all. So,
to find out more and to get started on
your Zoey journey, visit
zoey.com/stephven.
You can use my exclusive code CEO10
for 10% off. Don't tell anybody about
that, okay? Just for you guys.
[Music]
a
oh
[Music]